## 11.1 Introduction

Consider an organization that provides a Website that allows its customers to view their products. The company has received frequent customer feedbacks to provide the shopping facility online. Therefore, the company has decided to add the shopping facility in their Website by creating dynamic Web pages. These Web pages will allow the user to shop for the products online. For example, details such as credit card number, email, and phone number entered by the customer must be in a proper format. Further, the developer also requires to retrieve the chosen products and their quantity to calculate the total cost.

The developer can handle all these critical tasks by using a scripting language. A scripting language refers to a set of instructions that provides some functionality when the user interacts with a Web page.

---

## 11.2 Scripting

Scripting refers to a series of commands that are interpreted and executed sequentially and immediately on occurrence of an event. This event is an action generated by a user while interacting with a Web page. Examples of events include button clicks, selecting a product from a menu, and so on. Scripting languages are often embedded in the HTML pages to change the behaviour of the Web pages according to the user’s requirements.

There are two types of scripting languages, described as follows:

* **Client-side Scripting**

  * Refers to a script being executed on the client’s machine by the browser.
* **Server-side Scripting**

  * Refers to a script being executed on a Web server to generate dynamic HTML pages.

---

## 11.3 JavaScript

JavaScript is a scripting language that allows you to build dynamic Web pages by ensuring maximum user interactivity. JavaScript language is an object-based language, which means that it provides objects for specifying functionalities. In real life, an object is a visible entity such as a car or a table. Every object has some characteristics and is capable of performing certain actions. Similarly, in a scripting language, an object has a unique identity, state, and behaviour.

The identity of the object distinguishes it from the other objects of the same type. The state of the object refers to its characteristics, whereas the behavior of the object consists of its possible actions. The object stores its identity and state in fields (also called variables) and exposes its behaviour through functions (actions).

| **Car**                           | **Table**              |
| --------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| **Identity**: BMW F90 M5          | **Identity**: T002     |
| **State**: Color-Red, Wheels-Four | **State**: Color-Brown |
| **Behavior**: Running             | **Behavior**: Stable   |

---

## 11.4 Versions of JavaScript

The first version of JavaScript was developed by Brendan Eich at Netscape in 1995 and was named JavaScript 1.0. Netscape Navigator 1.0 and Internet Explorer 3.0 supported JavaScript 1.0. Over the period, it gradually evolved with newer versions where each version provided better features and functionalities as compared to their previous versions.

Table 11.1 lists various versions of JavaScript language, also called as ECMAScript.

| **Edition** | **Name**            | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                             |
| ----------- | ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1           | ECMAScript 1 (1997) | First edition                                                                                                                                                                               |
| 2           | ECMAScript 2 (1998) | Supported by Internet Explorer from version 4.0                                                                                                                                             |
| 3           | ECMAScript 3 (1999) | Added regular expressions and try/catch and was supported by Internet Explorer 5.0, Netscape Navigator 1.0, and Opera 5.0 onwards                                                           |
| 5           | ECMAScript 5 (2009) | Added features such as ‘strict mode’, JSON support, `String.trim()`, `Array.isArray()`, and Array iteration methods. Is supported by Internet Explorer 6.0 and Mozilla Firefox 1.0 onwards. |
| 6           | ECMAScript 2015     | Was published in 2015 and added features such as `let` and `const`, default parameter values, `Array.find()`, and `Array.findIndex()`                                                       |
| 7           | ECMAScript 2016     | Was published in 2016 and added exponential operator and `Array.prototype.includes`                                                                                                         |
| 8           | ECMAScript 2017     | Was published in 2017 and added features such as string padding, `Object.entries`, `Object.values`, async functions, and shared memory                                                      |
| 9           | ECMAScript 2018     | Was published in 2018 and added features such as rest/spread properties, asynchronous iteration, and `Promise.finally()`                                                                    |
| 10          | ECMAScript 2019     | Was published in 2019 and added features such as `Array.prototype.flat`, `Array.prototype.flatMap`, and `Object.fromEntries`                                                                |
| 11          | ECMAScript 2020     | Was published in June 2020 and introduces a BIGINT primitive type for arbitrary-sized integers, nullish coalescing operator, and globalThis object.                                         |
| 12          | ECMAScript 2021     | Was published in June 2021 and introduces `replaceAll` method for Strings, `Promise.any.AggregateError`, `WeakRef`, and other features.                                                     |

---

## 11.5 Client-side JavaScript

JavaScript is a scripting language, which can be executed on the client-side and on the server-side. A client-side JavaScript (CSJS) is executed by the browser on the user’s workstation. A client-side script might contain instructions for the browser to handle user interactivity. These instructions might be to change the look or content of a Web page based on the user inputs. Examples include displaying a welcome page with the username, displaying date and time, validating that the required user details are filled, and so on.

A JavaScript is either embedded in an HTML page or is separately defined in a file, which is saved with a `.js` extension. In client-side scripting, when an HTML page is requested, the Web server sends all the required files to the user’s computer. The Web browser executes the script and displays the HTML page to the user along with any tangible output of the script.

---

## 11.6 Server-side JavaScript

A server-side JavaScript (SSJS) is executed by the Web server when an HTML page is requested by a user. The output of a server-side JavaScript is sent to the user and is displayed by the browser. In this case, a user might not be aware that a script was executed on the server to produce the desirable output.

A server-side JavaScript can interact with the database, fetch the required information specific to the user, and display it to the user. This means that server-side scripting fulfills the goal of providing dynamic content in a web page. Unlike client-side JavaScript, HTML pages using server-side JavaScript are compiled into bytecode files on the server. Compilation is a process of converting the code into machine-independent code. This machine-independent code is known as the bytecode, which is an executable file. The Web server runs this executable to generate the desired output.

---

## 11.7 Script Tag
The `<script>` tag defines a script for an HTML page to make them interactive. The browser that supports scripts interprets and executes the script specified under the `<script>` tag when the page loads in the browser. You can directly insert a JavaScript code under the `<script>` tag. You can define multiple `<script>` tags either in the `<head>` or in the `<body>` elements of an HTML page. In HTML5, the type attribute `type="text/javascript"` specifying the scripting language is no longer required as it is optional.

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
	<head>
		<title>Document</title>
		<script>
			document.write("Hello World!");
		</script>
	</head>
<body>
	...
</body>
</html>
```

There are two main purpose of the `<script>` tag, which are as follows:
- Identifies a given segment of script in the HTML page.
- Loads an external script file.

## 11.8 Variables in JavaScript
A variable refers to a symbolic name that holds a value, which keeps changing. For example, age of a student and salary of an employee can be treated as variables. A real-life example for variables includes the variables used in algebraic expressions that store values.

In JavaScript, a variable is a unique location in the computer's memory that stores a value and has a unique name. The name of the variable is used to access and read the value stored in it. A variable can store different types of data such as a character, a number, or a string. Therefore, a variable acts as container for saving and changing values during execution of the script.

## 11.8.1 Declaring Variables
Declaring a variable refers to creating a variable by specifying the variable name. For example, you can create a variable named `studName` to store the name of a student. Here, the variable name `studName` is referred to as a identifier. In JavaScript, the var keyword is used to create a variable by allocating memory to it. A keyword is a reserved word that holds a special meaning in JavaScript.

You can initialize the variable at the time of creating the variable or later. Initilization refers to the task of assigning a value to a variable. once the variable is initialized, you can change the value of a variable as required.

Variables allow keeping track of data during the execution of the script. While referring to a variable, you are referring to the value of that variable. In JavaScript, you can declare and initialize multiple variables in a single statement.

Following syntax demonstrates how to declare variables in JavaScript:
**Syntax**
```
var <variableName>;
```
where,
```
var: Is the keyword in JavaScript
variableName: Is a valid variable name.
```

Following syntax demonstrates how to initalize variables in JavaScript:
**Syntax**
```
<variableName> = <value>;
```
where,
= : Is the assignment operator used to assign values.
value: Is the data that is to be stored in the variable.

Following syntax demonstrates how to declare and initialize multiple variables in a single statement, which are separated by commas.
**Syntax**
```
var <variableName> = <value>, <variableName2> = <value2>;
```

Code Snippet 2 declares two variables namely, `studID` and `studName` and assign values to them.
**Code Snippet 2**
```
var studID;
var studName;
studID = 50;
studName = "Abdullah";
```

This code assigns values to `studID` and `studName` variables by using the assignment operator `=`. The value named `Abdullah` is specified within double quotes.

Code Snippet 3 demonstrates how to declare and initialize multiple variables in a single statement in JavaScript.

**Code Snippet 3**
`var studName = 'Abdullah', studAge = 15;`

---
## 11.8.2 Variable Naming Rules
You cannot refer to a variable until it is created in JavaScript. JavaScript is a case-sensitive language. This means that if you specify `X` and `x` as variables, both of them are treated as two different variables. Similarly, in JavaScript, there are certain rules, which must be followed while specifying variables names. These rules for a variable name are as follows:

- Can consist of digits, underscore, and alphabets.
- Must begin with a letter or the underscore character.
- Cannot begin with a number and cannot contain any punctuation marks.
- Cannot contain any kind of special characters such as `+`, `*`, `%` and so on.
- Cannot contain spaces.
- Cannot be a JavaScript keyword.

It is recommended to give meaningful names to variables such that the name determines the kind of data stored in the variable.

## 11.9 Data Types in JavaScript
A Web page designer can store different types of values such as numbers, characters, or strings in variables. However, the Web page designer must know what kind of data a particular variable is expected to store. To identify the type of data that can be stored in a variable , JavaScript provides different data types.

A Web page designer is not required to specify the data type while declaring variables. Due to this, JavaScript is referred to as the loosely typed language. This means that a variable holding a number can also hold a string value later. The values of variables are automatically mapped to their data types when the script is executed in the browser.

Data types in JavaScript are classified into two broad categories namely, primitive and composite data types. Primitive data types contain only a single value, whereas the composite data types contain a group values.

## 11.9.1 Primitive Data Types
A primitive data type contains a single literal value such as number or a string. A literal is a static value that you can assign to variables.

| Primitive Data Type | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `boolean`           | Contains only two values namely, true or false.                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| `null`              | Contains only one value namely, null. A variable of this value specifies that the variable has no value. This null value is keyword and it is not the same as the value, zero                                                                  |
| `number`            | Contains positive and negative numbers and numbers with decimal point. Some of the valid examples include 6, 7.5, -8, 7.5e-3 and so on.                                                                                                        |
| `string`            | Contains alphanumeric characters in single or double quotation marks. The single quotes is used to represent a string, which itself consists of quotation marks. A set of quotes without any characters within it is known as the null string. |
## 11.9.2 Composite Data Types
A composite data type stores a collection of multiple related values, unlike primitive data types. In JavaScript, all composite data types are treated as objects. A composite data type can be either predefined or user-defined in JavaScript.

| Data Types | Description                                                                                                                                             |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Objects    | Refers to a collection of properties and functions. Properties specify the characteristics and functions determine the behavior of a JavaScript object. |
| Functions  | Refers to a collection of statements, which are instructions to achieve a specific task                                                                 |
| Arrays     | Refers to a collection of values stored in a adjacent memory locations.                                                                                 |

---
